# Growth Mindset

## Introduction

Hey everyone. My name is Ian Howell and I'm a software engineer working for
Microsoft. Before I get started with the talk, I would just like to extend a
thank you to everyone here who is involved with HackSLU; the organizers, the
mentors, the judges, the speakers, and of course, those of you who are
participating.

Today I'm going to spend some time talking about the Growth Mindset, and how it
can help you to break into the software development industry.

## A Growth Mindset

So what am I talking about? What is this "Growth Mindset" thing?

A person with a growth mindset believes that they are a dynamic being, capable
of improving their skills and adapting to new situations. They recognize that
effort and practice are essential to learning.

    A growth mindset leads to a desire to learn and therefore a tendency to
    embrace challenges, persist in the face of setbacks, see failure as
    essential to mastery, learn from criticism, and find lessons and inspiration
    in the success of others".

I stole that. That's a quote. I took it from my company's self-assessment page.
This is what I reference twice a year to evaluate the progress that I have made
as a software developer at Microsoft. It's also what my managers use, not only
for themselves, but also as a guideline for how they determine who to promote.
These qualities are what interviewers are looking for when selecting candidates
for new hires and internships.

So it's really important to me. And it's really important to my company. And it
should be really important to you too. A growth mindset will help you to excel
in all aspects of your life. It can help you become a better developer, a better
student, a better friend. But we're not here to talk about our social lives,
we're here to talk about breaking into the software development industry. But I
promise that if you start employing this way of thinking, it will change your
life. It changed mine.

If you missed the quote, that's okay, we're going to break it down and discuss
each of the qualities, starting with:

## A Desire to Learn

A Growth Mindset leads to a desire to learn.

About a year and a half ago, my team brought on a new Principal. For those who
don't know, a Principal is a step above Senior. So you would expect these guys
to know their stuff, to be experts in software, and to have answers to every
question. But this guy *didn't* have all the answers. In fact, he made it *very*
clear that he didn't have all the answers. I would hop on a call with him, and
it wouldn't matter if it was a one on one, a team meeting with 10+ people, or an
organization-wide meeting with more than 100 people on the call, he had
absolutely zero issues with asking a question. And they weren't "hard" questions
either. They were **fundamental** questions. Questions that every single person
on the call should know the answer to. Quite frankly, they were questions that I
would have been embarrassed ask myself. But I started to notice something
strange. I didn't know the answer to a lot of those questions either. I was
learning just by being in the same room as him. The team was learning and
growing alongside him.

And this principal *excelled*. He uncovered problems that had existed on our
team since it was formed. He completely revamped our developer environments into
something that is very user-friendly and easy to use. He refactored large chunks
of some of the most confusing code in our codebase. And ultimately, he wound up
fulfilling the role of a Principal by leading the way on large complex
processes, from the design to helping the rest of the team implement it.

In just a few months, this person went from being a question asker to being a
question answerer. And he was able to do it because he had a *genuine
curiosity*. He had a "Desire to Learn.

## A Tendency to Embrace Challenges

## Persistence in the Face of Setbacks

## Failing your way to Mastery

Dark Souls - The boss has to beat you *every* time, but you only have to beat
the boss *once. You mush *FAIL* EVERY TIME before you finally succeed.

Jake the Dog - Dude, sucking at sumthinâ€™ is the first step towards being sorta
good at something

Errare Humanum est - To err is human

## Learning from Criticism

## Finding Lessons and Inspiration in the Success of Others

## Conclusion

Being good at stuff is important for finding a job. If you want to find a job as
a software developer, you'll obviously need to know at least a little bit about
how to develop software. But being good at stuff is *really* hard. Becoming an
expert in a given topic takes a lot of time and experience. And when I say "a
lot of time and experience", I don't mean "4 years of college and an internship
or two". The goal of university is to provide you with a very broad pool of
knowledge. It's practically impossible for you, a student, to be a perfect,
rock-star expert candidate when applying for jobs.

But there's good news; you don't have to be. Your potential employers are fully
aware that you are not an expert. Sure, they'll expect you to have some
background in software, but generally, when companies hire students, they
understand that they are hiring someone who will need mentorship and training.
When a company brings on new hires and interns straight out of university, they
are not looking for someone who is already an expert, but rather someone who
demonstrates the ability to learn and grow and *become* an expert.

They want to see that you are eager to learn. They want developers who seek out
challenges and are willing to take risks. They expect that you will make
mistakes and occasionally struggle. They already know that you are probably not
going to get things right the first time; they know that you are going to
sometimes fail. But they also hope that you will learn from those failures. They
hope that you will accept feedback and criticism and use it to improve. And
finally, they want to see that you work well with others, that you are learning
from the successes and failures of your peers.

<!-- Software development is a moving target.  -->
